Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: capnography.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is capnography, and why is it so important in anaesthesia?
Capnography is the continuous measurement and graphical display of the partial
pressure, or concentration, of carbon dioxide in the respired gases throughout the
respiratory cycle, and it is one of the most important and informative monitors in
anaesthesia, regarded as an essential standard of monitoring.
It is helpful to distinguish the terms:
capnometry is the measurement and numerical display of the carbon dioxide
concentration, in particular the end-tidal value;
capnography is the display of the carbon dioxide concentration as a continuous
waveform against time, the capnogram,
which conveys far more information than the number alone.
Capnography is important for several reasons.
It is the most reliable means of confirming that a tracheal tube lies in the
trachea rather than the oesophagus,
the sustained presence of carbon dioxide over several breaths being the
gold-standard confirmation of correct placement.
It continuously confirms that ventilation is occurring and that the breathing
system is intact, giving immediate warning of disconnection, obstruction or apnoea.
The end-tidal value gives a continuous,
non-invasive estimate of the arterial carbon dioxide and so of the adequacy of
ventilation. The shape of the waveform reveals disturbances of ventilation,
the airway and the circulation.
And it is a key monitor during cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
For these reasons capnography is mandatory whenever the airway is instrumented.
So capnography is the continuous graphical display of the carbon dioxide in
respired gas — capnometry being its numerical measurement — and it is essential
because it confirms tracheal intubation and continued ventilation,
estimates the arterial carbon dioxide, reveals ventilatory,
airway and circulatory disturbances through its waveform, and guides resuscitation.
What is measured, and in what units?
What is measured is the amount of carbon dioxide in the sampled respiratory gas,
expressed either as a partial pressure or as a concentration,
and being clear about the quantity and its units is the basis of interpreting the
capnogram.
Fundamentally the analyser measures the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the
gas, which may be expressed directly as a partial pressure in kilopascals or
millimetres of mercury, or converted to a fractional concentration in per cent,
the two being related through the total pressure.
The quantity of greatest clinical interest is the end-tidal partial pressure of
carbon dioxide, the value at the end of expiration,
which approximates the alveolar partial pressure and so, in health,
the arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide;
the normal end-tidal value is about four point seven to six point oh kilopascals,
or thirty-five to forty-five millimetres of mercury,
a little below the arterial value.
The analyser also displays the inspired carbon dioxide,
which should normally fall to zero or near zero during inspiration,
a raised inspired value indicating rebreathing.
The continuous trace plots the partial pressure against time,
and some devices can also plot it against expired volume, the volumetric capnogram,
which gives additional information. The standard time capnogram is the one in
routine use.
So capnography measures the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in respired gas,
expressed in kilopascals, millimetres of mercury or per cent;
the key value is the end-tidal partial pressure,
normally about four point seven to six point oh kilopascals,
approximating the arterial value, while the inspired value should fall to near
zero, and the quantity is plotted continuously against time.
On what physical principle does the carbon dioxide analyser most commonly work?
The carbon dioxide analyser used in clinical capnography works almost universally
on the principle of infrared absorption spectroscopy,
exploiting the absorption of infrared radiation by the carbon dioxide molecule,
and understanding this principle explains both the operation and the limitations of
the device.
The principle rests on the fact that gas molecules composed of two or more
dissimilar atoms — such as carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and water vapour,
but not the symmetrical diatomic molecules oxygen and nitrogen — absorb infrared
radiation at specific wavelengths characteristic of the molecule,
because the radiation excites vibration and rotation of the molecular bonds,
which occurs at particular energies and so particular wavelengths.
Carbon dioxide absorbs infrared radiation strongly at a characteristic wavelength
of about four point three micrometres.
In the analyser, a beam of infrared radiation is passed through the gas sample,
and the amount of radiation absorbed at the carbon dioxide wavelength is measured
by a detector; the more carbon dioxide present,
the more radiation is absorbed and the less reaches the detector.
From the reduction in transmitted radiation the concentration of carbon dioxide is
calculated. A specific wavelength is selected by a filter so that the absorption
measured is that of carbon dioxide and not of other gases.
The response is rapid, allowing the breath-by-breath waveform.
So the carbon dioxide analyser works by infrared absorption: carbon dioxide,
as an asymmetrical polyatomic molecule,
absorbs infrared radiation at a characteristic wavelength of about four point three
micrometres, and the analyser measures the absorption of infrared radiation at that
wavelength by the gas sample, the absorption indicating the concentration of carbon
dioxide, rapidly enough to display the waveform.
State the relationship governing the absorption, and its implications.
The absorption of infrared radiation by the carbon dioxide in the sample is
governed by the Beer-Lambert law, which relates the absorption of radiation to the
concentration of the absorbing substance and the path length,
and this relationship underlies the calibration and some of the limitations of the
analyser.
The Beer-Lambert law states that the absorbance of radiation passing through a
medium is proportional to the concentration of the absorbing substance and to the
length of the path through which the radiation passes,
and that the intensity of the transmitted radiation falls exponentially as the
concentration or path length increases.
Applied to the analyser, for a fixed path length through the sample cell,
the absorption of infrared radiation increases with the concentration of carbon
dioxide, allowing the concentration to be determined from the measured absorption.
Two implications follow.
First, because the relationship between transmitted radiation and concentration is
exponential rather than linear, the analyser must be calibrated and its output
linearised to give a correct reading across the range.
Second, the law assumes the absorption is due only to the substance of interest,
so the presence of other gases that absorb at a nearby wavelength,
or that alter the absorption, introduces error, as we shall discuss.
The law also explains why a defined path length and a stable radiation source are
needed.
So the absorption is governed by the Beer-Lambert law,
the absorbance being proportional to the concentration of carbon dioxide and the
path length, with the transmitted radiation falling exponentially;
this requires calibration and linearisation of the non-linear response,
and makes the measurement susceptible to interference from other absorbing gases.
Distinguish sidestream from mainstream analysers.
Capnograph analysers are of two main configurations according to where the carbon
dioxide is measured relative to the breathing system — sidestream and mainstream —
and the distinction is important because each has characteristic advantages and
disadvantages affecting their use.
In the sidestream, or diverting, analyser,
a continuous sample of gas is aspirated from the breathing system at the patient
connection, through a fine sampling tube, by a pump,
and conducted to the analyser cell located within the monitor, some distance away,
where the carbon dioxide is measured; the sampled gas is then scavenged or returned.
Its advantages are that the analyser is remote and not on the airway,
the sampling connector is light, and it can sample from unintubated patients
through nasal cannulae.
Its disadvantages are a delay between the gas leaving the patient and being
analysed, the transit time through the sampling tube;
the possibility of the fine tube becoming blocked by water or secretions,
requiring a water trap; the aspiration of a continuous gas flow,
which must be accounted for; and some blunting of the waveform.
In the mainstream, or non-diverting, analyser,
the infrared measuring cell is placed directly in the breathing system at the
patient connection, in the path of the respired gas,
so the carbon dioxide is measured in situ without aspirating a sample.
Its advantages are a rapid, undistorted response with no delay and no sampling
problems; its disadvantages are a bulky,
heated sensor on the airway that adds weight and dead space and can be damaged.
So the sidestream analyser aspirates a continuous gas sample through a fine tube to
a remote cell — convenient and usable in unintubated patients but with a transit
delay and risk of blockage — whereas the mainstream analyser measures in a cell
placed directly in the airway, giving a fast undistorted response but with a bulky
heated sensor on the breathing system.
Describe the normal capnogram and its phases.
The normal capnogram, the plot of carbon dioxide partial pressure against time
through the respiratory cycle, has a characteristic shape divided into phases,
and recognising the normal trace is the basis for interpreting the abnormalities
that are so informative.
The normal time capnogram is described in four phases.
Phase one, sometimes called phase zero, is the inspiratory baseline:
during inspiration and at the very start of expiration the gas at the sensor is
fresh, carbon-dioxide-free gas from the anatomical dead space,
so the trace lies at or near zero.
Phase two is the expiratory upstroke, a steep,
rapid rise as the dead-space gas is replaced by alveolar gas containing carbon
dioxide reaching the sensor, the trace rising sharply.
Phase three is the expiratory, or alveolar, plateau, an almost horizontal segment,
rising very slightly, during which alveolar gas is sampled;
the carbon dioxide here represents the alveolar gas,
and the value at the very end of this plateau,
the highest point reached at end-expiration, is the end-tidal carbon dioxide.
Phase four, sometimes called phase zero, is the inspiratory downstroke,
a sharp fall to baseline as inspiration begins and fresh gas reaches the sensor.
The point where the upstroke meets the plateau forms the alpha angle,
and where the plateau meets the downstroke the beta angle.
A normal capnogram has a square, well-defined shape with a flat baseline at zero
and a near-horizontal plateau.
So the normal capnogram has four phases: the zero inspiratory baseline,
the steep expiratory upstroke as alveolar gas reaches the sensor,
the near-horizontal alveolar plateau whose end-point is the end-tidal carbon
dioxide, and the sharp inspiratory downstroke to baseline — a square waveform with
a zero baseline and a flat plateau.
What is the significance of the end-tidal to arterial carbon dioxide difference?
The relationship between the end-tidal carbon dioxide and the arterial carbon
dioxide, and the difference between them,
is of central importance in interpreting capnography,
because the end-tidal value is used as a non-invasive surrogate for the arterial
value, and the size of the gradient determines how reliable that surrogate is.
In a healthy person with normal lungs,
the end-tidal partial pressure of carbon dioxide is slightly lower than the
arterial partial pressure, by a small gradient of about zero point five to one
kilopascal, or three to five millimetres of mercury.
This difference arises because the end-tidal gas is a mixture of gas from alveoli
with a range of ventilation-perfusion ratios,
including some alveoli that are ventilated but underperfused — alveolar dead space
— which contribute carbon-dioxide-poor gas and dilute the end-tidal value below the
true mean alveolar and arterial value.
In health this gradient is small and constant,
so the end-tidal value tracks the arterial value reliably.
However, in disease the gradient widens:
any increase in alveolar dead space — from reduced pulmonary perfusion as in low
cardiac output, hypovolaemia, pulmonary embolism,
or high airway pressures — increases the proportion of carbon-dioxide-poor gas and
widens the end-tidal-to-arterial difference,
so that the end-tidal value underestimates the arterial value to a greater and
variable degree.
Thus the end-tidal value cannot be assumed equal to the arterial value in the
critically ill.
So the end-tidal carbon dioxide is normally slightly below the arterial value by
about zero point five to one kilopascal, owing to alveolar dead space;
this small gradient makes the end-tidal value a reliable surrogate in health,
but conditions that increase alveolar dead space,
especially reduced pulmonary perfusion, widen the gradient unpredictably,
so the end-tidal value then underestimates the arterial.
What causes the end-tidal carbon dioxide to rise?
A rise in the end-tidal carbon dioxide may result from an increase in the
production of carbon dioxide, a decrease in its elimination by ventilation,
or an increase in the carbon dioxide delivered to the lungs,
and a systematic consideration of these is important because a rising end-tidal
value is a common and sometimes serious finding.
Increased production of carbon dioxide raises the end-tidal value if ventilation is
fixed: causes include fever and sepsis, shivering, pain and light anaesthesia,
the absorption of carbon dioxide from an insufflated peritoneum during laparoscopy,
the release of a vascular clamp or tourniquet returning carbon-dioxide-laden blood,
the administration of bicarbonate, and, dramatically and importantly,
the hypermetabolism of malignant hyperthermia and thyroid storm.
Decreased elimination raises the end-tidal value through hypoventilation:
respiratory depression, inadequate ventilator settings,
partial airway or breathing-system obstruction,
and increased apparatus or alveolar dead space being compensated.
Rebreathing of carbon dioxide — from an exhausted carbon-dioxide absorbent,
a faulty breathing-system valve, or inadequate fresh gas flow — raises both the
inspired and the end-tidal value.
A sudden marked rise, particularly a progressive one with tachycardia,
must raise the suspicion of malignant hyperthermia.
So the end-tidal carbon dioxide rises from increased production — fever, sepsis,
shivering, laparoscopic carbon dioxide absorption, clamp release,
and especially malignant hyperthermia — from decreased elimination through
hypoventilation and obstruction, and from rebreathing due to absorbent exhaustion
or valve failure; a progressive unexplained rise should prompt consideration of
malignant hyperthermia.
And what causes the end-tidal carbon dioxide to fall?
A fall in the end-tidal carbon dioxide may result from decreased production,
increased elimination by hyperventilation,
or — most importantly — a reduction in the carbon dioxide delivered to the lungs by
the circulation, and distinguishing these is critical because a sudden fall can
signal a life-threatening event.
Decreased production lowers the end-tidal value,
as in hypothermia and reduced metabolic rate, a gradual change.
Increased elimination by hyperventilation lowers it,
whether deliberate or from inappropriate ventilator settings.
Most importantly, a reduction in pulmonary blood flow reduces the delivery of
carbon dioxide to the lungs and so lowers the end-tidal value: a sudden,
dramatic fall in the end-tidal carbon dioxide is a key sign of a catastrophic fall
in cardiac output or pulmonary perfusion — cardiac arrest,
in which the capnogram collapses towards zero; massive pulmonary embolism,
whether thrombus, air or amniotic fluid; and severe hypotension or haemorrhage.
Equally, a sudden fall to zero indicates that no carbon dioxide is reaching the
sensor at all, which signals a critical ventilatory event:
complete airway or breathing-system disconnection, obstruction,
oesophageal intubation, or total ventilator failure.
Thus a sudden fall demands immediate assessment to distinguish a circulatory
catastrophe from a ventilatory one.
So the end-tidal carbon dioxide falls from decreased production as in hypothermia,
from hyperventilation, and critically from reduced pulmonary perfusion — a sudden
dramatic fall signalling cardiac arrest,
pulmonary embolism or severe hypotension — while a sudden fall to zero signals
disconnection, obstruction, oesophageal intubation or ventilator failure,
each demanding immediate action.
Describe the capnogram of airway obstruction or bronchospasm.
The capnogram of airway obstruction or bronchospasm has a characteristic and
readily recognised shape, often described as the shark-fin or sloping appearance,
and recognising it is clinically valuable because it indicates obstruction to
expiratory gas flow and can reveal bronchospasm even before it is otherwise
apparent.
In normal expiration, the alveolar gas empties rapidly and evenly,
giving a steep upstroke and a flat plateau.
When there is obstruction to expiratory airflow — as in bronchospasm,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
a kinked or partially obstructed tracheal tube,
or a partially obstructed airway — the alveoli empty unevenly and slowly,
the obstructed regions emptying late,
so that the carbon dioxide continues to rise throughout expiration rather than
reaching a flat plateau.
The result is a capnogram in which the expiratory upstroke is slurred and
prolonged, merging into an upsloping rather than horizontal plateau,
so that the sharp angle between the upstroke and plateau — the alpha angle — is
increased and rounded, producing the characteristic sloping, shark-fin shape.
The degree of sloping reflects the severity of the obstruction,
and improvement in the shape with bronchodilator treatment confirms the response.
Because this change can appear with developing bronchospasm,
the capnogram serves as an early monitor of airway obstruction.
The end-tidal value may also be affected.
So airway obstruction and bronchospasm produce a capnogram with a slurred,
prolonged upstroke and an upsloping plateau — the shark-fin shape with an
increased, rounded alpha angle — reflecting the slow,
uneven emptying of obstructed alveoli;
its severity tracks the obstruction and its improvement confirms the response to
bronchodilators, making the capnogram an early sign of bronchospasm.
What does a raised baseline or other abnormal features indicate?
Several other abnormalities of the capnogram — a raised baseline,
particular notches and oscillations — each carry specific diagnostic significance,
and recognising them adds to the information the capnogram provides.
A raised baseline, in which the inspiratory portion of the trace fails to return to
zero so that there is carbon dioxide present in the inspired gas,
indicates rebreathing of carbon dioxide:
the patient is inspiring gas that still contains carbon dioxide.
The causes are an exhausted carbon-dioxide absorbent in a circle system,
an incompetent expiratory or inspiratory valve allowing exhaled gas to be
re-inspired, or an inadequate fresh gas flow in a system that depends on washout;
the whole trace, baseline and plateau, is shifted up.
A curare cleft, or notch, is a dip in the alveolar plateau,
caused by a spontaneous inspiratory effort by a partially paralysed patient during
mechanical ventilation, the diaphragm's contraction briefly drawing in fresh gas;
it indicates returning neuromuscular function or inadequate paralysis.
Small regular oscillations on the plateau, cardiogenic oscillations,
are caused by the beating heart agitating the gas, seen at low respiratory rates,
and are benign. A prolonged or absent plateau, failure to reach a plateau,
indicates very short expiration or sampling problems.
Each feature thus points to a specific cause.
So a raised baseline indicates rebreathing — from absorbent exhaustion,
valve incompetence or inadequate fresh gas flow; a cleft in the plateau,
the curare cleft, indicates a spontaneous breath through returning neuromuscular
function; cardiogenic oscillations are benign cardiac agitation of the gas;
and the capnogram's particular abnormalities each point to a specific cause.
How is capnography used to confirm tracheal intubation?
Capnography is the single most reliable method of confirming that a tracheal tube
has been correctly placed in the trachea rather than the oesophagus,
and this role is so important that the detection of carbon dioxide is regarded as
the gold standard, mandated for confirming intubation.
The principle is that gas exhaled from the lungs contains carbon dioxide,
whereas gas from the oesophagus and stomach contains essentially none.
After intubation, if the tube is in the trachea,
ventilation produces a normal capnogram with a sustained,
characteristic carbon dioxide waveform that persists over successive breaths;
if the tube is in the oesophagus, no carbon dioxide, or at most a small,
rapidly diminishing amount from gas previously forced into the stomach,
is detected, and the trace remains flat at zero or falls away within a few breaths.
The key is the persistence of a normal waveform over several breaths — at least six
breaths are recommended — because a few breaths of carbon dioxide can occasionally
appear from the stomach after bag-mask ventilation or ingestion of carbonated drink.
A sustained capnogram confirms tracheal placement;
its absence indicates the tube is not in the trachea and must be removed,
unless there is no carbon dioxide because there is no circulation,
as in cardiac arrest, when other confirmation is needed.
This is why capnography must be available and used for every intubation,
in theatre and beyond.
So capnography confirms tracheal intubation because exhaled tracheal gas contains
carbon dioxide while oesophageal gas does not: a sustained,
normal capnogram over at least six breaths confirms tracheal placement,
whereas a flat or rapidly diminishing trace indicates oesophageal intubation
requiring immediate removal of the tube — except in cardiac arrest,
where absent carbon dioxide reflects absent circulation.
What is the role of capnography during cardiopulmonary resuscitation?
Capnography has several valuable roles during cardiopulmonary resuscitation,
and an understanding of them illustrates the relationship between the end-tidal
carbon dioxide and pulmonary blood flow,
making capnography a recommended monitor during resuscitation.
During cardiac arrest, pulmonary blood flow is generated only by chest
compressions, and the end-tidal carbon dioxide reflects the pulmonary blood flow
and so the effectiveness of those compressions.
First, capnography confirms and continuously monitors tracheal tube placement
during the resuscitation, without interrupting compressions.
Second, the value of the end-tidal carbon dioxide indicates the quality of chest
compressions: effective compressions generating adequate pulmonary blood flow
produce a measurable end-tidal carbon dioxide,
while a very low value suggests ineffective compressions,
prompting attention to compression depth and rate and to rescuer fatigue.
Third, and strikingly, a sudden rise in the end-tidal carbon dioxide during
resuscitation is an early sign of the return of spontaneous circulation,
as the restored cardiac output suddenly delivers accumulated carbon dioxide to the
lungs, often detected before a pulse can be palpated.
Fourth, a persistently very low end-tidal carbon dioxide despite good-quality
resuscitation, after a prolonged effort,
is associated with a poor prognosis and may inform decisions,
though it is used as part of the overall picture rather than alone.
So during cardiopulmonary resuscitation capnography confirms tube placement,
gauges the effectiveness of chest compressions through the end-tidal value
reflecting pulmonary blood flow, signals the return of spontaneous circulation by a
sudden rise in the end-tidal carbon dioxide, and,
when persistently very low despite good resuscitation, indicates a poor prognosis.
What are the sources of error and the calibration requirements?
Capnography, though robust and reliable,
is subject to a number of sources of error and requires appropriate calibration,
and an awareness of these ensures the readings are interpreted correctly and the
device used properly.
A first source of error, specific to the sidestream analyser,
is contamination or blockage of the sampling line by water or secretions,
which distorts or abolishes the trace;
a water trap and appropriate sampling tubing mitigate this,
and the continuous aspiration of gas must be accounted for,
especially in small patients and low-flow systems.
The transit delay of the sidestream system means the displayed waveform lags the
actual breath, which matters for precise timing.
A second source is interference from other gases:
nitrous oxide and water vapour absorb infrared radiation near the carbon dioxide
wavelength, and high concentrations of nitrous oxide cause an error through
collision, or pressure, broadening of the absorption — the presence of nitrous
oxide broadening the carbon dioxide absorption band — for which modern analysers
compensate; water vapour and contamination of the cell windows also cause error.
Calibration against known gas mixtures,
or automatic zeroing against carbon-dioxide-free gas,
corrects the zero and the gain, and the non-linear infrared response must be
linearised. Atmospheric pressure affects the partial pressure reading and must be
accounted for.
Mechanical faults, leaks and sampling at too high a rate relative to the patient's
gas flow also cause error.
So capnography errors include sampling-line blockage by water in the sidestream
type, the transit delay, interference from nitrous oxide and water vapour through
overlapping absorption and collision broadening,
and the effects of atmospheric pressure; these are managed by water traps,
gas compensation, regular calibration and zeroing against known and
carbon-dioxide-free gases, and linearisation of the response.
Describe the volumetric capnogram and what additional information it gives.
The volumetric capnogram, which plots the carbon dioxide concentration against the
expired volume rather than against time, provides additional,
quantitative information beyond the time capnogram,
and although less commonly used, it is conceptually valuable and worth
understanding.
In the volumetric capnogram, the expired carbon dioxide is plotted on the vertical
axis against the volume of gas exhaled on the horizontal axis during a single
expiration, rather than against time.
This allows the relationship between carbon dioxide and exhaled volume to be
analysed and yields information not available from the time trace.
The early part of the expiration, exhaling the carbon-dioxide-free anatomical
dead-space gas, appears as the initial volume over which no carbon dioxide is
exhaled, allowing the anatomical dead space to be measured as the volume exhaled
before carbon dioxide appears.
The subsequent rise and plateau represent the mixed and then the alveolar gas.
By combining the volumetric capnogram with the arterial carbon dioxide,
the physiological dead space and the alveolar dead space can be calculated,
using the Bohr and Enghoff approaches, giving a measure of wasted ventilation.
The area under the curve over a period gives the volume of carbon dioxide
eliminated, a measure of carbon dioxide production and of metabolism.
Thus the volumetric capnogram quantifies dead space,
carbon dioxide elimination and the efficiency of ventilation.
So the volumetric capnogram plots carbon dioxide against expired volume,
allowing measurement of the anatomical dead space from the carbon-dioxide-free
initial volume, calculation of the physiological and alveolar dead space when
combined with the arterial value, and determination of carbon dioxide elimination
and production from the area under the curve — quantifying dead space and the
efficiency of ventilation beyond what the time capnogram shows.
Are there other methods of carbon dioxide measurement worth noting?
While infrared absorption dominates clinical capnography,
a few other methods of measuring carbon dioxide deserve brief mention for
completeness and because each illustrates a different principle,
even though they are now of historical or niche use.
The colorimetric carbon dioxide detector is a simple chemical device,
a disposable indicator placed between the tracheal tube and the breathing system,
containing a pH-sensitive dye that changes colour when exposed to carbon dioxide,
which forms an acid in solution; it changes colour breath by breath in the presence
of carbon dioxide and is used as a simple,
equipment-free confirmation of tracheal intubation,
particularly in emergencies and pre-hospital care,
though it gives only a qualitative indication and can be misled.
Other physical methods that have been used to measure carbon dioxide include the
mass spectrometer, which separates and quantifies gases by their mass-to-charge
ratio and can measure all the respiratory gases including carbon dioxide,
formerly used in multiplexed theatre systems; the Raman spectrometer,
using the scattering of laser light; and, in blood, the carbon dioxide electrode,
the Severinghaus electrode, which measures the partial pressure of carbon dioxide
in a blood sample through the pH change it produces, used in blood-gas analysis.
These illustrate the variety of principles available.
So besides infrared absorption, carbon dioxide can be detected by the simple
colorimetric pH-sensitive device for confirming intubation,
and measured by mass spectrometry and Raman spectroscopy in gas,
and by the Severinghaus carbon dioxide electrode in blood;
infrared absorption remains the standard for continuous clinical capnography.
Summarise the clinical applications of capnography.
Drawing the clinical uses together,
capnography is an extraordinarily versatile monitor whose applications span the
confirmation of the airway, the monitoring of ventilation and circulation,
and the detection of critical events,
which is why it is mandatory wherever the airway is managed.
It confirms tracheal intubation, the gold standard,
and continuously confirms continued correct placement and the integrity of the
breathing system, giving immediate warning of disconnection, obstruction,
extubation and ventilator failure by the loss of the waveform.
It monitors the adequacy of ventilation through the end-tidal value,
guiding ventilator settings and detecting hypoventilation and hyperventilation,
and is used to maintain a target carbon dioxide in neuroanaesthesia.
Its waveform reveals airway obstruction and bronchospasm by the shark-fin shape,
rebreathing by a raised baseline, and returning neuromuscular function by the
curare cleft.
It detects critical circulatory events — a sudden fall signalling cardiac arrest,
pulmonary or air embolism, or severe hypotension.
It is central to cardiopulmonary resuscitation, gauging compression quality,
signalling the return of circulation, and informing prognosis.
It gives early warning of the rising carbon dioxide of malignant hyperthermia.
And it is used to monitor sedated and spontaneously breathing patients through
nasal sampling.
So capnography's clinical applications include confirming and monitoring the airway
and breathing system, assessing the adequacy of ventilation,
detecting airway obstruction, rebreathing and returning paralysis through the
waveform, signalling circulatory catastrophes and guiding resuscitation,
warning of malignant hyperthermia, and monitoring sedation — a versatility that
makes it an essential monitor.
What safety considerations attend its use?
The safe and effective use of capnography depends on understanding both its hazards
and the consequences of failing to use or correctly interpret it,
and a brief account of these completes the picture.
The principal safety point is positive:
the consistent use of capnography prevents harm, and the failure to use it,
or to act on its findings, has been repeatedly implicated in avoidable deaths from
unrecognised oesophageal intubation and airway disconnection;
its use is therefore mandated whenever the airway is instrumented,
including outside the operating theatre, in intensive care and during transfer,
where unrecognised airway events are common.
The corollary is that the anaesthetist must understand the waveform and respond
appropriately, neither ignoring an abnormal trace nor being falsely reassured.
Specific hazards of the equipment are minor: the sidestream sample gas,
which may contain anaesthetic agents,
must be scavenged or returned and not vented into the theatre;
the continuous aspiration of sample gas can affect ventilation in very small
patients and low-flow systems; the mainstream sensor adds dead space and weight
and, being heated, could in principle cause a burn.
Cross-contamination and infection control require appropriate sampling lines and
filters. The trace must be interpreted in context,
since absent carbon dioxide may reflect absent circulation rather than a displaced
tube.
So the overriding safety consideration is that capnography must always be used and
correctly interpreted to prevent the deaths caused by unrecognised oesophageal
intubation and disconnection; its minor equipment hazards — sample-gas scavenging,
the aspirated volume in small patients, the mainstream sensor's dead space,
and infection control — are readily managed,
and absent carbon dioxide must be interpreted in the clinical context.
Finally, draw the station together.
Drawing the station together, capnography is the continuous graphical measurement
of carbon dioxide in respired gas, and it stands among the most important monitors
in anaesthesia because of the breadth and immediacy of the information it provides.
It works by infrared absorption, carbon dioxide absorbing radiation at about four
point three micrometres according to the Beer-Lambert law,
measured either by a remote sidestream analyser sampling through a fine tube or by
a mainstream sensor in the airway.
The normal capnogram has its zero baseline, steep upstroke,
alveolar plateau ending in the end-tidal value, and downstroke;
the end-tidal carbon dioxide normally lies just below the arterial value by a small
dead-space gradient that widens when pulmonary perfusion falls.
The value rises with increased production — fever, sepsis,
laparoscopy and malignant hyperthermia — hypoventilation and rebreathing,
and falls with hyperventilation and, critically, reduced pulmonary perfusion,
a sudden fall signalling cardiac arrest, embolism or disconnection.
The waveform's shape reveals obstruction, rebreathing and returning paralysis.
Capnography is the gold standard for confirming tracheal intubation and a key
monitor in resuscitation, and its consistent use prevents avoidable deaths.
So capnography unites the physics of infrared absorption with the physiology of
carbon dioxide carriage and pulmonary perfusion to confirm the airway,
monitor ventilation and circulation, and detect critical events — an essential,
mandatory monitor whose correct use and interpretation safeguard the patient
throughout anaesthesia and resuscitation.
How is capnography used in the spontaneously breathing or sedated patient?
Capnography is increasingly used in the spontaneously breathing and sedated
patient, outside the context of tracheal intubation,
where it provides valuable monitoring of ventilation,
and an account of this use illustrates its versatility and growing role in patient
safety.
In the sedated patient breathing spontaneously — during procedural sedation,
in recovery, or receiving opioids on the ward — carbon dioxide can be sampled from
a nasal or oral-nasal cannula incorporating a sampling port,
or from a sampling line placed near the mouth and nose,
allowing a capnogram to be obtained without an artificial airway.
This monitors the adequacy of ventilation and, crucially,
gives early warning of respiratory depression and apnoea:
a fall in the respiratory rate, a change in the waveform,
or the loss of the capnogram indicates hypoventilation or apnoea before the oxygen
saturation falls, particularly in a patient receiving supplemental oxygen,
in whom the saturation may remain normal long after ventilation has become
inadequate.
Capnography thus detects opioid- and sedation-induced respiratory depression
earlier than pulse oximetry alone, and its use during sedation and for at-risk
patients receiving opioids is increasingly recommended to improve safety.
The waveform from a cannula is less square than from a sealed airway,
being diluted by entrained gas, so the absolute end-tidal value is less reliable,
but the trend, the rate and the detection of apnoea are valuable.
So in the spontaneously breathing or sedated patient,
capnography sampled through a nasal or oral-nasal cannula monitors ventilation and
gives early warning of respiratory depression and apnoea — before the saturation
falls, especially on supplemental oxygen — detecting opioid- and sedation-induced
hypoventilation earlier than pulse oximetry,
though the cannula waveform gives a less reliable absolute end-tidal value than a
sealed airway.
Thank you. An excellent and thorough account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Capnography is the continuous graphical display of CO2 in respired gas
(capnometry = the numerical value);
it works by INFRARED ABSORPTION - CO2 absorbs IR at ~4.3 micrometres per the
Beer-Lambert law - measured by a sidestream analyser (samples through a fine tube
to a remote cell; convenient, usable in unintubated patients,
but has a transit delay and risk of water blockage) or a mainstream analyser (cell
in the airway; fast, undistorted, but bulky and heated).
Second, The normal capnogram has four phases: zero inspiratory baseline,
steep expiratory upstroke, near-horizontal alveolar plateau (its end-point is the
end-tidal CO2), and inspiratory downstroke;
the end-tidal value is normally just BELOW the arterial value (by ~0.5-1 kPa) due
to alveolar dead space - this gradient WIDENS when pulmonary perfusion falls,
so end-tidal then underestimates arterial.
Third, End-tidal CO2 RISES with increased production (fever, sepsis, shivering,
laparoscopic CO2 absorption, clamp/tourniquet release,
and especially MALIGNANT HYPERTHERMIA), hypoventilation, and rebreathing;
it FALLS with hypothermia, hyperventilation,
and critically with reduced pulmonary perfusion - a sudden fall signals cardiac
arrest, pulmonary/air embolism or severe hypotension,
and a sudden fall to ZERO signals disconnection, obstruction,
oesophageal intubation or ventilator failure.
Fourth, Waveform shapes are diagnostic:
a sloping shark-fin trace (increased alpha angle) = airway
obstruction/bronchospasm; a raised baseline = rebreathing (exhausted absorbent,
incompetent valve, inadequate fresh gas flow);
a cleft in the plateau (curare cleft) = a spontaneous breath through returning
neuromuscular function; cardiogenic oscillations are benign.
Fifth, Capnography is the GOLD STANDARD for confirming tracheal intubation (a
sustained normal waveform over >=6 breaths confirms tracheal placement;
a flat/diminishing trace = oesophageal - remove the tube,
except in arrest where absent CO2 reflects absent circulation),
and is a key monitor in CPR (gauges compression quality,
a sudden rise signals return of spontaneous circulation,
persistently very low suggests poor prognosis);
its consistent use prevents avoidable deaths from unrecognised oesophageal
intubation and disconnection.
Thank you. That concludes the station.